---
layout: page
permalink: /blog/20230531
title: Tears of Isaac
date: 2023-06-25 11:12:00-0400           # NAME OF THE FILE MUST BE IN THIS FORMAT: date-xxx.md
tags: philosophy-of-religion psychology
categories: philosophy
nav: true
---

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/isaac.png" alt= "The Sacrifice of Isaac, 1602 by Caravaggio" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true width=600 %}
    </div>
</div>
> <font size=3> "Here I am,"  he replied. </font>

I find some of the religious narratives to be quite interesting and thought-provoking. Among which, there are compelling stories such as those of Abraham or Joseph. Most captivating part of the story of Abraham, I believe, is the part where he is commanded to sacrifice his "only son, whom he loves" -Isaac- in the region of Moriah. There have been numerious essays and articles written on this part, especially with an emphasis on the psychological struggle, the moral dilemma, and the religious significance of the story. The other day, I read one of those interesting works, <i>Fear and Trembling</i> by the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard. I have to admit, that was a challenging read for me because of its excessive use of complex language, metaphors, repetitive phrases and a little bit of Kierkegaard's poetic flair. In his work, Kierkegaard analyzes the story of Abraham from different perspectives and attempts to answer the question: "Was Abraham justified in sacrificing Isaac?". Before talking about the arguments of Kierkegaard, I would like to briefly summarize the story of Abraham and Isaac.

There exist two distinct narratives of the story, intertwined with a serious difference in between. According to Genesis 22, God tested Abraham by telling him to sacrifice his son Isaac as a burnt offering, which is a form of offering to God referred several times in Hebrew Bible. When Abraham, his servants and Isaac arrive at the mountain Moriah, he proceeded with preparing the offering by collecting wood and setting the fire. Upon seeing all the settings, Isaac asked his father: "The fire and wood are here but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?”. Abraham answered, “God himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, my son.” When everything was ready, Abraham built an altar, bound his son and laid him on top of the wood. Just as Abraham is about to sacrifice Isaac, an angel calls out and commands Abraham not to "lay a hand on the boy". Instead, Abraham is provided with a raw lamb to sacrifice. The angel then reiterates God's promise to Abraham, and Abraham and his servants return home.

According to Quran 37 (Surah As-Saffat), there is an additional narrative to the story. In this version, Abraham has a dream in which God commands him to sacrifice his son, (name is not provided explicitly, but many muslims believe it to be Ishmael). Abraham informs his son of the dream, and his son agrees to be sacrificed, stating that "Do as you are commanded. God willing, you will find me steadfast". As Abraham attempts to sacrifice his son, God intervenes by sending his angel Jibra'il (Gabriel), who then informs Abraham that his sacrifice has already been accepted. The Quran states that Abraham's son was ransomed with a "great sacrifice" and that Abraham had passed the test by his willingness to carry out God's command. In the Bible, Isaac plays a passive role in the sacrifice. However, according to the rabbinical writings such as the Fourth Book of Maccabees (which is not considered as canonical in Christianity), Isaac was a willing participant in the sacrifice, similar to his position in the Quran.

I understand that this story may not be the most pleasant one from a different perspective. The idea of receiving a request from God like this can be quite unsettling, and Abraham's attempt to sacrifice his son may seem like a completely insane and cruel act. Some people argue that God's command to kill contradicts the objective morality presented in the scripture itself. Certain believers, particularly those who support the divine command theory, may argue that God's command is the ultimate source of morality, and therefore, it is not contradictory—or it can lead to the suspension of ethical considerations in a theological context. Another viewpoint is that God's command serves as a test of Abraham's faith and should not be taken literally. On the other hand, some non-believers argue that such a command by God contradicts the concept of a loving God, which raises a significant problem often discussed in the philosophy of religion: the problem of evil.

Alternatively, some suggest that Abraham's attempt to sacrifice his son demonstrates his unwavering faith, which is seen by some as a vice rather than a virtue. However, according to the rational choice theory of religion, that might have been the most rational action Abraham could have taken given the circumstances. In the end, the story of Abraham and Isaac is a complex one, and it sparks numerous philosophical discussions. I don't intend to delve into various arguments and counter-arguments on this topic.

What I strongly believe is that, regardless of the religious or secular perspective, this story has something to tell us. Losing your own son - let alone killing him yourself - is a tragedy that no father would wish to experience. However, the story of Abraham and Isaac is not about the tragedy itself, but about the courage to face it. It is about the courage to say "Here I am" in the face of the unknown, the uncertainty and the possibility of losing your most precious treasure. It is indeed a terrifying dilemma for Abraham to be faced with the obligation of returning the very thing he values most in his life to its source of life.

Kierkegaard, who has a great admiration and enthusiasm for the story of Abraham, attempts to answer three questions in his work: "Is there such a thing as a teleological suspension of the ethical?", "Is there such a thing as an absolute duty toward God?", and "Was Abraham justified in concealing his purpose from Sarah, Eleazar, and Isaac?". 

Kierkegaard considers ethics as a universal truth, that has no purpose (<i>telos</i>) external to itself, similar to the Hegel's position. But he suggests that the faith of Abraham (or in general faith demonstrated by the <i>knight of faith</i>) elevates the individual above the ethical. This faith causes the individual to have a different telos than the ethical (universal telos). According to Kierkegaard, Abraham faced a <i>paradox of faith</i> when he was asked to sacrifice Isaac, a contradiction between his common ethical duty to his son and his personal religious duty to God. This paradox cannot be reconciled by reason. It shows that Kierkegaard leans towards [fideism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fideism) when it comes to the religious epistemology and he believes that faith is independent of reason. He does not propose it as rational or irrational; instead, he suggests that it surpasses the limits of rationality. Although supported by various prominent philosophers so far, fideism was not a very popular position in the history of religious epistemology. It was rejected by the church for a long time, and attempts to rationalize belief in God such as by those of Thomas Aquinas were preferred. For Islam, fideism was not a very popular position either. Theologians such as Al-Ghazali and Ibn Taymiyyah, who are considered as the most influential figures in the history of Islamic theology, were not fideists. They believed that reason and revelation are compatible and that reason can be used to prove the existence of God. For the second question, Kierkegaard states that the individual is higher than the universal by the paradox of faith and therefore Abraham has an absolute duty to God. In these circumstances, ethical becomes relative and Abraham cannot be criticized for his actions. In the third question, Kierkegaard asserts that Abraham's actions are not rooted in either aesthetics or ethics. They cannot be classified as aesthetic because aesthetics necessitates one's willingness to sacrifice oneself for others, rather than expecting others to sacrifice themselves for him. Similarly, these actions do not align with ethical principles, as ethics demands the disclosure of one's intentions to others. Abraham's actions, on the other hand, fall under the realm of religious actions, as they are undertaken in the name of God.

In his work, Kierkegaard also establishes distinctions among the following concepts: <i>knight of faith</i>, <i>knight of infinite resignation</i> and <i>tragic hero</i>. <b>The tragic hero</b>, exemplified in Greek mythology, such as Agamemnon, takes his actions in order to achieve a greater outcome that complies with the ethical (universal telos). Because of his actions, tragedy of the hero can be appreciated by the common people and considered as a heroic move. Tragic hero represents the universal and sacrifices himself for it. <b>The knight of infinite resignation</b>, is a person who has a strong desire for something, but is able to give up on it. He can come to terms with the pain of losing it, while holding onto the hope of eventually attaining it one day. Whereas <b>the knight of faith</b>, exemplified by Abraham, is a person who has a strong desire for something, but is able to give up on it, and then receive it back by virtue of the absurd. By Kirkegaard's own words, knight of faith makes a wonderful move at the end:

> ...but then occurs the prodigy, he makes still another movement more wonderful than all, for he says, "I believe nevertheless that I shall get her, in virtue, that is, of the absurd, in virtue of the fact that with God all things are possible."

To conclude, Kierkegaard attempts to highlight the paradoxical nature of the story of Abraham by showcasing the dilemma between ethical universal rules and one's duty to God. Instead of placing all the emphasis on the universal, he suggests that the individual is higher than the universal and that the individual's duty to God is absolute.

