---
layout: page
permalink: /blog/20230329
title: On the Roger Scruton Reader
date: 2023-03-28 11:12:00-0400           # NAME OF THE FILE MUST BE IN THIS FORMAT: date-xxx.md
tags: philosophy essays
categories: philosophy
nav: true
---

Recently, I stumbled upon the works of Roger Scruton, a prominent conservative philosopher with a keen interest in politics, culture, religion, architecture, animal rights, and music. To become familiar with his ideas on a variety of different topics, I picked up a copy of _The Roger Scruton Reader_, a captivating compilation of his thought-provoking essays. Mark Dooley, who serves as the intellectual biographer of Roger Scruton, skillfully edited this book, bringing together some of Scruton's best works.

While reading Scruton's works, I occasionally found myself in disagreement with some of his ideas. As other reviewers have pointed out, he does not always provide sufficient justification for his claims and tends to remain too much within the bounds of continental philosophy. Nonetheless, I thoroughly enjoyed delving into the mind of such a profound intellectual. Scruton's gentle patriotism and sincere desire to construct and preserve the things that "bind" a nation together were truly inspiring.

In this post, I will try to summarize the main ideas of Roger Scruton in the book and share some of the quotes I found interesting. To be organised, I'll go through the essays in the order they appear in the book. Here, you can find the titles in the book:

- [Conservatism](#conservatism)
    - Gentle Regrets (2005): How I Became a Conservative
    - Thinkers of the New Left (1986): What is Right?
    - The New Criterion (1998): Rousseau and the Origins of Liberalism
- [The Nation](#the-nation)
    - The West and the Rest (2003): The Social Contract
    - The American Spectator (2007): The Nation State and Democracy
    - The New Criterion (2006): Should he have Spoken?
- [Sex and the Sacred](#sex-and-the-sacred)
    - Death-Devoted Heart (2004): The Philosophy of Love
    - A Political Philosophy (2006): Meaningful Marriage
    - Axess Magazine (2008): The Return of Religion
- [Culture](#culture)
    - Modern Culture (2000): The Aesthetic Gaze
    - Culture Counts (2007): Knowledge and Meaning
    - Classicism Now
    - Philosophy: Principles and Problems (2005): Music
- [Homecomings](#homecomings)
    - A Political Philosophy (2006): Conserving Nature
    - The World of Fine Wine (2005): The Philosophy of Wine
    - Animal Rights and Wrongs (2000): Thoughts on Hunting


### Conservatism
<br>
The Roger Scruton Reader begins with Scruton's essays on how he became a conservative and what is Right from his own perspective. He criticizes the abolitionist leftist movements, stating that _"our concern should be not to abolish these powers that bind society together but to ensure that they are not also used to sunder it"_. For him, we should aim not for a world without power, but for a world where power is peacefully exercised. He also argues against liberalism, claiming that the social contract, as Rousseau put it, should not only be between the living but between the living, the dead, and the unborn. According to him, the dead and the unborn are as much members of society as the living. This argument plays an important role in justifying environmentalism from a conservative perspective as well.

Scruton defends major ideas of Edmund Burke:
- Defence of authority and obedience
- Subtle defence of traditions, prejudice and customs
- Response to the theory of social contract

An interesting defense of prejudice:
> "Burke brought home to me that our most necessary beliefs may be both unjustified and unjustifiable from our own perspective, that the attempt to justify them will lead merely to their loss. Replacing them with the abstract rational systems of the philosophers, we may think ourselves more rational and better equippted, and our new beliefs are far less justified, for the very reason that they are justified by ourselves. The real justification for a prejudice is the one which justifies it _as_ a prejudice, rather than as a rational conclusion of an argument. In other words, it is a justification that cannot be conducted from our own perspective, but only from outside, as it were, as an anthropologist might justify the customs and rituals of an alien tribe."

To illustrate the point, he talks about the prejudices surrounding sexual relations:
> "These vary from society to society; but until recently they have had a common feature, which is that people distinguish seemly from unseemly conduct, abhor explicit sexual display, and require modesty in women and chivalry in men, in the negotiations that precede sexual union. There are very good anthropological reasons for this, in terms of the long term stability of sexual relations, and the commitment that is necessary if children are to be inducted into society. But these are not the reasons that motivate the traditional conduct of men and women. This conduct is guided by deep and immovable prejudice, in which outrage, shame and honour are the ultimate grounds. Sexual liberators have no difficulty in showing that those motives are irrational, in the sense of being founded on no reasoned justification available to the person whose motives they are. And they may propose sexual liberation as a rational alternative, a code of conduct that is rational from the first-person viewpoint, since it derives a complete code of practice from a transparently reasonable aim, which is sexual pleasure.
    

Roger argues that there is a paradox in the propositions of Rousseau.
- According to Rousseau, a society can be free only if freely consented to, and obligations can be binding only if self-imposed. Therefore, society must be founded in a contract: each person promises obedience in exchange for a like promise from everyone else.
- With the advent of social contract, **natural liberty** of an individual is replaced with **civil liberty**. From civip liberty springs **moral liberty**.
- True liberty, for Rousseau, is moral liberty. It is only with the coming of moral liberty that we can bind ourselves by a contract.
- **So, how can society be founded on a contract, when no contract can exist until society has been founded (so that moral liberty is achieved)?**

Here comes beautiful quotes from Kant and Rousseau:
- "Kant suggests that “**obedience to a law which we prescribe to ourselves is liberty**”. And for Rousseau, a society can be free only if freely consented to, and obligations can be binding only if self-imposed. **People are free only when they can bind themselves**."


Against the ideas of Rousseau, Roger consistently defends the _invisible hand_ metaphor, which is used to describe self-organizing systems that owe its success to its centuries-long existence.  
- Rousseau claims that man has been corrupted by society. To rediscover our freedom, we must measure every activity against its natural counterpart. No existing institution should be accepted, therefore, just because it is *existing*. All practices and customs should be questioned, and amended if they fail to come up to the mark.
- Scruton argues that the attack on society in the name of “nature” exemplifies what to him is the root error of liberalism in all its forms, namely, the inability to accept, or even to perceive, the inherited forms of social knowledge. By social knowledge, he means the kind of knowledge embodied in the common law, in manners, costume, social convention, and, also, in morality. Such knowledge arises “**by an invisible hand**” from the open-ended business of society, from problems that have been confronted and solved, from agreements that have been perpetuated by custom, from conventions that coordinate our otherwise conflicting passions, and from the unending process of negotiation and compromise whereby we quieten the dogs of war.
- Roger states that social knowledge does not accumulate as money does, nor does it grow in the manner of scientific knowledge, which can be stored in books. It exists only in and through its repeated exercise: it is social, tacit, practical, and can never be captured in a formula or plan. For him, "it is in the nature of customs that they cannot be chosen: they arise by an invisible hand from our consensual dealings." 
- Ludwig von Mises in *Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis* argues that prices in a market contain information that is indispensable to economic life. This information exists only in the free exchange of goods and services; it is information about the real pressure of human needs. Hence the attemp to encompass economic life in a rational plan, with prices controlled from the centre, will destroy the information on which the plan must draw. Rationalism in economics is irrational.


Here, I believe, comes one of most important theoretical foundations of conservatism, which distinguishes it from liberalism of Rousseau:
> “The dead and the unborn are as much members of society as the living. To dishonour the dead is to reject the relation on which society is built - the relation of obligation between generations. Those who have lost respect for their dead have ceased to be trusteed of their inheritance. Inevitably, therefore, they lose the sense of obligation to future generations.” 

It’s very pervasive in the thoughts of Roger that today’s living people are the inheritors of the dead and the guardians of the unborn. Critics of Western societies point out that mere “contract between the living” is a contract to squander the earth’s resources for the benefit of its temporary residents.

### The Nation

In the essay _Social Contract_, Roger talks about the relationship between Christianity and Secularism:

- In *The West and the Rest (2003): The Social Contract,* Roger excessively discuss about the distinction between secular politics and religion. He states “the law is detached from the demands of religion and reconstrued as an abstract system of rights and duties”. Roger suggests that this idea was rooted in the medieval distinction between *regnum* and *sacerdotium*. According to him, secularization was not an immediate procedure imposed by the modernization. Rather, it was a result of the gradual process of the separation of the Church from the State by the hands of clergy.
- St. Paul, who transformed the ascetic and self-denying religion of Christ into an organized form of worship, was a Roman citizen, versed in the law, who shaped the early Church through the legal idea of the *universitas* or corporation. The Pauline Church was designed, not as a sovereign body, but as a universal citizen, entitled to the protection of the secular and imperial powers but with no claim to displace those powers as the source of legal order. This corresponds to Christ’s own vision, in the parable of the tribute money, in which Caesar’s public jurisdiction is tacitly contrasted with the inner authority of religion, governing the person-to-person relationship between the individual and God: “Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s” (Matthew 22, 30).

On "self-sacrifice" and the cycle of vengeance:
> “The Christian prayer is also a declaration of faith; it includes the crucial words: ‘**forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us**’. The ‘imitation of Christ’ is conceived in the same terms: not as a vanquishing of God’s enemies, but as a self-sacrifice, a willing oblation, an acceptance of the worst tat human beings can do in a spirit of forgiveness. Needless to say Christians have not always followed this ideal, the Crusades being but one example. But is is also characteristic of Christianity that its adherents should apologize for the Crusades, taking on themselves the burden of a guilt incurred by their fellow believers, and seeking forgiveness from those whom their faith has wronged. Christianity contains within itself that idea of a political solution which Aeschylus presents in the *Oresteia:* a solution which steps out of the cycle of vengeance, in order to seek pearce through conciliation.” 

---
- The **Reformation** (alternatively named the **Protestant Reformation** or the **European Reformation**) was a major movement within [Western Christianity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_Christianity) in 16th-century Europe that posed a religious and political challenge to the [Catholic Church](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catholic_Church) and in particular to [papal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Papal)
 authority, arising from what were perceived to be [errors, abuses, and discrepancies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_the_Catholic_Church) by the Catholic Church.
- The philosopher and critic [René Girard](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/193536.Ren_Girard) sees this transition as critical to the Christian revelation. In the absence of a judicial process, Girard argues, societies are invaded by “*mimetic desire*”, as rivals struggle to match each other’s social and material acquisitions. The traditional solution is to identify a victim, one marked by fate as “outside” the community and therefore not entitled to vengeance against it, who can be the target of the accumulated blood-lust, and who can bring the cycle of retribution to an end. Scapegoating is society’s way of recreating “difference” and so restoring itself. By uniting against the scapegoat people are released from their rivalries and reconciled.
- The **mimetic theory** of [desire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desire), an explanation of [human behavior](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_behavior) and [culture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture), originated with the French [historian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historian), [literary critic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literary_critic), and [philosopher of social science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_social_science) [René Girard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Girard) (1923-2015). The name of the theory derives from the philosophical concept [mimesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mimesis), which carries a wide range of meanings. In mimetic theory, mimesis refers to human desire, which Girard thought was not linear but the product of a mimetic process in which people [imitate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imitation) models who endow objects with value. Girard called this phenomenon "mimetic desire", and described mimetic desire as the foundation of his theory:
    
    "Man is the creature who does not know what to desire, and he turns to others in order to make up his mind. We desire what others desire because we imitate their desires."
    
    Mimetic theory posits that mimetic desire leads to natural rivalry and eventually to [scapegoating](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scapegoating) - Girard called this the [scapegoat mechanism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scapegoat_mechanism). 
    

For Roger, it is possible to accept the Christian doctrine and yet to stop short of pacifism. "Christ suffered the most violent death, not in order to recommend defencelessness, but in order to show that the Christian is not to be defined by the violence of his enemies, but by the love of his friends. In enjoining us to turn the other cheek, Christ was setting before us, as always, a personal ideal, not a political project." Roger compares two different situations and concludes that: If _he_ is attacked and turns the other cheek, he exemplifies the Christian virtue of meeknes. If a _child_ is attacked and he turns the child's other cheek, then he becomes a party to the violence.

Additionally, he states that the prevailing Christian culture played an important role in the adaptation of immigrants to the American culture. The political order, he believes, must rely on the habit of forgiveness and conciliation which tells the Christian to see the other not as a threat but as an invitation to sympathy.

--- 
- In The American Spectator (2007): The Nation State and Democracy, Roger criticizes the European Union, saying that “If proof were needed for the proposition that the nation state is the friend of democracy, and transnational government the foe, then the European Union is it.” He believes that the American settlement was successful because “American federalism created not an empire but a nation state. It happened because the American settlemen established a secular rule of law, a territorial jurisdiction and a common language in a place that the people were busily claiming as their *home.*” 
- “The American example reminds us of one of the essential requirements of nationhood, which is a ‘myth of origins’. We in England had such a myth, in the form of the Arthurian legends, which established a claim to the land that could never be disproved. It worked, partly because those stories located the origin of England in a misty pas beyond the reach of rational enquiry, to be understood in terms of the long history that stemmed from it, and not in terms of exact historical events. In America the myth of origins focuses on a precise moment, the moment of the founding Fathers, heroes who stand higher in narrative of history than ever they stood in reality, and who bequeathed to their countrymen a text every bit as sacred as Hebrew Bible or the Holy Quran.”
- Roger complains that in Europe, rehearsing the myth of origins is either scorned as chauvinistic or condemned as another example of “racism and xenophobia”. Roger believes that the EU cannot create a rival identity to the nation state, unless it can identify itself as something superior to the nation states. It must become a project of release from the erros and crimes of nationhood. This means identifying the nation state as a symptom of the adolescence of mankind, a stage on the way to transnational maturity.

--- 
- In *Should he have Spoken,* Scruton talks about a speech known as “Rivers of Blood”, which was delivered by the conservative politican Enoch Powell to the Birmingham Conservatives in 1968. In his infamous speech, Powell strongly criticizes the mass immigration and proposes the Race Relations Bill. The expression "rivers of blood" did not appear in the speech but is an allusion to a line from [Virgil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virgil)'s *[Aeneid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aeneid)* which he quoted "as I look ahead, I am filled with foreboding; like the Roman, I seem to see the [River Tiber](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/River_Tiber) foaming with much blood'".
- “Plato’s theory of the noble lie was a first shot describing the role of myth in human thinking. Myths are not falsehoods, nor are they scientific theories: they are attempts to capture difficult truths in symbols. Myths also arm us against realities that are otherwise too fateful or disturbing to bear contemplation.” 
- “The descructive effects of liberalism are not usually felty by the liberals themselves - not immediately, at least. The first victim of liberal immigration policies is the indigenous working class.”
- Roger Scruton refers to Powell as a romantic person who was flight from reality of British society as it was in 1968. “Powell’s England was a place made sacred by Chaucer and Shakespeare, by the Anglican settlement and the anointed monarch, by the common law and the Great Offices of State. It was the very same England that Churchill had invoked in his wartime speeches: a country whose pas was lost in Arthurian mists, whose title was as God-given as that of the Israelites and whose patriotism outshone that of Rome.”

---

### Sex and the Sacred
In a series of essays, Scruton talks about the differences between _agape_ and _eros_, Plato's philosophical attempts to differentiate _eros_ and _sexual desire_, meaning of the marriage and the role of the _sacred_ in modern world.

- Attempts to re-fashion *eros* based on *agape:* 
> Christ reduced God's commandments to two: love God entirely, and love your neighbor as yourself. But if love can be commanded, then love must be a choice. It must invovle voluntary actions and voluntary thoughts. The New Testament word for love - _agape_ is translated as _caritas_ in Latin and charity in our own authorized version of the Bible. It is a technical term designed to accommodate the revolutionary idea of lvoe as a duty...
Medieval writers did not suppose that erotic love is divinely inspired; on the contrary, they accepted the New Testament ideal of a love brought down to us from God, a love that coms to us as a duty, which provides the test of virtue here on earth, and which therefore must be separated from every form of sensual longing. But precisely because their world-view was founded in the cult of _agape_, they recognized _eros_ as a problem to be solved. And the evident solution was to re-fashion erotic love on the model of the love that we owe to God. Like that other and higher love, erotic love is a destiny, both a joy and a burden, and it points beyond the world to a realm of grace. It is surrounded with sacred rites and customs; it imposes a rule of chastity and fidelity; and it transforms the lover into a quasi-supernatural being, capable of virtuous deeds and noble sacrifices beyond the reach of common mortals.



- “In *The Symposium* Socrates expounds the famous Platonic theory of the soul’s ascent, from the desire for carnal union with the beautiful object to the act of serene contemplation of the Form of the Beautiful. This purging away of the base trappings of carnal desire, so as to enjoy love not as a species of concuspiscence but as a form of quasi-religious veneration, was, for Plato, the rational solution to an existential predicament. Sexual desire afflicts us as a kind of trouble - an overcoming of the soul by passions whose bodily origin sets them beyond the reach of our intellectual powers.” (101)
- “Plato’s account of love was premised on a particular view of sexual desire, one inherited by Avicenna, by Aquinas, by the poets of courtly love, and by Dante. In desire, he believed, we act and feel as animals. In erotic love, however, it is our nature as rational beings that is primarily engaged - a fact which was made particularly apparent to Plato by his own homosexuality, which seemed to divorce erotic love from animal reproduction, and at the same time to deprive the sexual act of any higher rational purpose. In order to permit the full flowering of erotic love, therefore, Plato considered it necessary to discard the element of desire.” (102)
    - Roger states that “the intentional object of desire is redescribed in Plato’s theory, not as the person desired, but as the act performed with him or her. The resulting mechanistic vision of sex has damaged discussions of this topic from Plato to the present day.”
- According to Roger, “sexual pleasure has *intentionality*. It is not just a tingling sensation, it is a response to another person, and to the act in which you are engaged with him or her”. Therefore he suggests that this please can cease if it depends on a thought that can be mistaken (like in the cse of Alcmene, who was visited by Jupiter in the form of her husband Amphitryon).
- An objection on perversion and obscenity


- Freedom and sexual interest
    
    
- Sin against love


- “Erotic love is exaltation of desire itself to the point of complete attachment. Its aim is to posses, to hold, to exclude; and its object is neither the body of the beloved nor the soul. ıt is the embodied person: the free being bound by flesh” (111)
- Roger successively emphasizes that erotic love focuses on the embodiment of its object: not on the *body* but on the other *as embodied*.

--- 

- **Meaningful Marriage** starts with the following part:
    
    > An institution can be looked at from outside, with the eyes of an anthropologist, who observes its social function. Or it can be looked at from inside, with the eyes of a participant, whose life it transforms. And what is observable from one perspective may not be observable from the other. The anthropologist who studies the seasonal war-making of a tribe may understand this institution as a way of securing territory, a way of controlling population, and a way of reaching a renewable equilibrium with neighbours. The warrior understands the institution in quite another way. For him it is a source of brotherhood, a mystical affirmation of identity between himself and the tribe, and a call to his soul from ancestral voices. The concepts used by the anthropologist - social function, solidarity, ideology and so on - make no contact with the warrior’s experience. If he were to make use of these concepts in describing what he feels, he would immediately cease to feel it. And the concepts that inform the warrior’s self-understanding - brotherhood, destiny, sacred obligation - play no part in the anthropologist’s explanation of what the warrior does.
    > 

- In *Meaningful Marriage*, Scruton complains about the transition of marriage from status to contract and believes that the official policy of the British government, downgrades and ultimately abolishes the marriage tie. He states that “the triumph of the contractual view of marriage represents a change in the phenomenology of sexual union, a retreat from the world of ‘substantial ties’ to a world of ‘negotiated deals’. And the world of vows is a world of sacred things, in which holy and indefeasible obligations stand athwart our lives and commands us along certain paths, whether we will or not.”
- Sacrificial character of the marriage


- Scruton on gay marriage: “Marriage has grown around the idea of sexual difference and all that sexual difference means. To make this feature accidental rather than essential is to change marriage beyond recognition. Gays want marriage because they want the social endorsement that it signifies; but by admitting gay marriage we deprive marriage of its social meaning, as the blessing conferred by the unborn on the living. The pressure for gay marriage is, therefore, in a certain measure self-defeating. It resembles Henry VIII’s (1491-1547) move to gain ecclesiastical endorsement for his divorce, by making himself head of the Church. The Church that endorsed his divorce thereby ceased to be the Church whose endorsement he was seeking.”

--- 

- In the **Return of Religion**, Roger criticizes the New Atheism proponents as evangelical atheists inspired by irrational beliefs about religions and religious people.
- “Only ignorance would cause us to deny that general picture, and the evangelical atheists assume that religion *must* deny that picture and therefore must, at some level, commit itself to the propagation of ignorance or at any rate the prevention of knowledge. Yet I do not know a religious person among my friends and acquaintances who *does* deny that picture, or who regards it as posing the remotest difficulty for his faith.” (130)
- “God has fled, but he is not dead. He is biding his time, waiting for us to make room for him. That, at least, is how I read the growing obsession with religion and the nostalgia for what we lost when the congregations shut their Bibles and their hymn books, broke asunder and went silently home.” (134)

--- 
### Culture
- In **Aesthetic Gaze**, Roger argues that if an activity is a means to an end, then no activity has intrinsic value. If one makes the function into the purpose - then he ceases to perform that function. (He quotes the words of Schiller from *Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man:* With the useful and the good, man is merely in earnest; but with the beautiful he *plays*). Roger continues: “The same is true of friendship. This too has a function. It binds people together, makes communities strong and durable, brings advantage to those who are joined by it and fortifies them in their endeavours. But make these advantages into your purpose, and the friendship is gone. Friendship is a means to advantage, but only when not treated as a means. The same applies to almost everything worthwhile: education, sport, hiking, fishing, hunting and art. If we are to live properly, therefore - not merely consuming the world but loving it and valuing it - we must cultivate the art of finding ends where we might have found only means. We must learn when and how to set our interests aside, not out of boredom or disgust, but out of disinterested passion for the thing itself.”

- An interesting interpretation of myths: “Myth is the province of religion; but myth is not fiction, since it does not deal in imaginary words. It is received as a narrative of *this* world, but on a higher plane, in which individual characters are dissolved into archetypes, and accidents subsumed by fate. In the mythic narrative everything is typified, and both characters and actions lose their individuality. When the subject of the drama is individualized, myth becomes fiction - the presentation of *another* world, with all the specificity of this one.”

- “Without tradition, originality cannot exist: for it is only against a tradition that it becomes perceivable. Tradition and originality are two components of a single process, whereby the individual makes himself known through his membership of the historical group.” (150)

### Homecomings

##### Conserving Nature

- According to Scruton, the conflict between environmentalists and conservatives can be explained by the fact that the environmentalists have been habituated to see conservatism as the ideology of free enterprise, and free enterprise as an assault on Earth’s resources, with no motive beyond the short-term gains that animate the market.
- One of the most influential ideas of Burke:
    - Social contract of Rousseau shouldn’t be between the living only, but it should be between the living, the unborn and the dead. The living may have an interest in consuming the Earth’s resources, but it was not for this that the dead laboured.

##### The Philosophy of Wine

- An interesting point from Scruton: “The pagan religions of Greece and Rome were strong on membership but weak on belief. Hence they centered on the cult, as the primary religious phenomenon. It was through on the cult, not the creed that the adept proved his religious orthodoxy and his oneness with his fellows. Western civilization has tended in recent centuries to emphasize belief - in particular the belief in a transcendental realm and an omnipotent king who presides over it. This theological emphasis, by representing religion as a matter of theological doctrine, exposes it to refutation. And that means that the real religious need of people - a need planted in us, according to some, by evolution and according to others by God - seeks other channels for its expression: usually forms of idolatry that do not achieve the refreshing humanity of the cult”
    - Scruton further argues that the theological beliefs are rationalizations of the cult, and the function of the cult is membership.

##### Thoughts on Hunting

- Scruton thinks that the concept of animal rights is based on a confusion. He tries to point out good sides of hunting:
    - Hunting, shooting and fishing are forms of social life. Hunting is not merely the occasional sport of the wealthy, but an elaborate social artefact, in which all country people from all walks of life participate, which spills over into horse trials, point-to-points, the pony club, the hunt ball, hunt breakfasts and fun-rides, charity events, puppy shows and farmers’ lunches.
    - It is a must to preserve the biodiversity and therefore we should be interfering with the nature. “If deer were never culled, Exmoor would contain nothing else besides suburban houses, and the highlands of Scotland would be treeless crags. If foxes were never killed, lambs, ducks and chickens would be reared indoors, in conditions that no decent person should tolerate.” And he believes that the truly callous way of handling with these, is the way that merely attacks the species - as when poisoned bait is laid for rats and foxes, or electric shocks are used to free the waterways of pike. The true graciousness of hunting occurs when the species in the individual and so to renew our respect for it. The true graciousness of hunting occurs when the species is controlled through the arduous pursuit of its individual members and so impresses upon us its real and eternal claim to our respect and sympathy.