---
layout: page
permalink: /blog/20230533
title: Reason and Belief in God - Part II
date: 2023-07-18 11:12:00-0400           # NAME OF THE FILE MUST BE IN THIS FORMAT: date-xxx.md
tags: philosophy-of-religion analytic-philosophy
categories: philosophy
nav: true
---

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/alone_ship.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true width=600 %}
    </div>
</div>

In my [previous post](./20230532), I started talking about the essay "Reason and Belief in God" by [Alvin Plantinga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alvin_Plantinga). In the first part, we briefly examined the arguments against the obligatory nature of atheism by Plantinga. In this article, we're gonna delve into the debunking of classical foundationalism and explore Plantinga's arguments for considering belief in God as properly basic.

- Refutation of Classical Foundationalism
    - [Classical Foundationalism Defined](#classical-foundationalism-defined)
    - [Refutation](#refutation)
- Reformed Epistemology
    - [The Reformed Objection to Natural Theology](#the-reformed-objection-to-natural-theology)
    - [Is Belief In God Properly Basic?](#is-belief-in-god-properly-basic)
    - [Is Reformed Epistemology a form of Fideism?](#is-reformed-epistemology-a-form-of-fideism)

### Classical Foundationalism Defined

[Classical foundationalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundationalism#Classical_foundationalism) has been a central theory in epistemology for a long time in Western philosophy. It is the view that all knowledge and justified belief are ultimately based upon a foundation of noninferential knowledge or justified belief. This foundation is justified by at least one of the following conditions: (1) it is **self-evident**, (2) **evident to the senses** or (3) **incorrigible***. Foundations are the propositions that are **properly basic**.

* Plantinga uses the word "incorrigible" for propositions like "I seem to see something green" - which are basically not falsifiable for one. To put it more formally: $$p$$ is incorrigible for $$S$$ if and only if (a) it is not possible that $$S$$ believe $$p$$ and $$p$$ be false, and (b) it is not possible that $$S$$ believe $$~p$$ and $$p$$ be true.

Plantinga comes with a concept called *noetic structure*. Noetic structure of a person is the set of propositions he believes, together with certain epistemic relations that hold among him and these propositions. A noetic structure is rational if it could be the 
noetic structure of a person who was completely rational. Properties of the rational noetic structure from a foundationalist perspective are:
- **Irreflexivity**: A proposition $$A$$ cannot be believed on the basis of $$A$$. Here, don't confuse a *self-evident* expression with reflexivity. An expression like 2 + 1 = 3 is self-evident; this is not to say that it is its own evidence, but that no evidence is needed for it.
- **Asymmetry**: If my belief that $$A$$ is based upon my belief that $$B$$, then my belief that $$B$$ is not based upon my belief that $$A$$. For example, if someone rationally believes in the existence of God based on a religious scripture that suggests His existence (belief $$A$$ is based on belief $$B$$), then their trust in that religious text shouldn't be based on their belief in the existence of God (belief $$B$$ is not based on belief $$A$$).
- **Basic beliefs**: In a rational noetic structure some beliefs will not be based on any other beliefs; some beliefs will be **basic**. These beliefs are the foundation of that noetic structure.

According to Plantinga, the classical foundationalism can be formulated as follows:
- (1) $$p$$ is rationally acceptable for $$S$$ only if either (i) $$p$$ is self-evident or evident to the senses or incorrigible for $$S$$, or (ii) there are paths in $$S$$'s noetic structure from $$p$$ to propositions $$q_1, ..., q_n$$ that (a) are basic for $$S$$, (b) are self-evident, evident to the senses, or incorrigible for $$S$$, and (c) support $$p$$.

### Refutation

Firstly, we have to notice that the classical foundationalism is a normative contention or claim. It provides us with a thesis about how a system of beliefs ought to be structured.
Now, a foundationalist would accept the following proposition without hesitation:
* (2) $$A$$ is properly basic for me only if $$A$$ is self-evident or incorrigible or evident to the senses for me.

According to Plantiga there seem to be two problems with (2):
- i. This proposition itself is neither self-evident nor evident to the senses nor incorrigible for me. Therefore rationally accepting (2) requires us to have path from (2) to properly basic propositions $$q_1, ..., q_n$$ in our noetic structure. And it appears that the foundationalist does not know of any support for (2) from propositions that are properly basic. To conclude, believing in the one of the underlying ideas of foundationalism, does not seem to be rational (at least the proper path is found), according to the foundationalism. One is self-referentially inconsistent in accepting (2) that does not meet the condition for proper basicality that (2) lays down.
- ii. Many propositions that do not seem to meet the conditions in (2) are still properly basic for one, some of which can be believing in the existence of other people or believing in the existence of the past. 

Plantinga suggests that nearly everyone accepts as basic some propositions such as the the existence of other people or the past (but not God). Therefore we might modify the proposition (2) in such a way to encompass those propositions as well. However, we can't escape from the (i) self-referential inconsistency problem.

> So unless we can find an argument for it from propositions that meet the
conditions (2) lays down, we shall, if we believe it, be believing a proposition that is probably either false or such that we ought not believe it. Therefore we ought not believe it, at least until someone produces such an argument for it in any of the cases.

To conclude, **it is not rational to accept classical foundationalism from a classical foundationalist point of view**. In some sense, classical foundationalism commits suicide due to its own premise (similar to the problem faced by logical positivism). But of course, this constitutes just a small part of the answer against evidentialist objections to theism. It is not necessary that evidentialist objection takes the classical foundationalism as basis for his arguments. Anyone, who accepts a different version of foundationalism or even a non-foundationalist epistemology, can still object to theism on the basis of evidentialism. As Plantinga puts it:
> But in order to evaluate it
(the proposed version of foundationalism), we should have to see what criterion of proper basicality was being invoked. In the absence of such specification the objection remains at best a promissory note. So far as the present discussion goes, then, the
next move is up to the evidentialist objector. He must specify a criterion for proper basicality that is free from self-referential difficulties, rules out belief in God as properly basic, and is such that there is some reason to think it is true. 


### The Reformed Objection to Natural Theology

[Natural theology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_theology), in simple terms, is the attempt to prove or demonstrate the existence of God. In despite of its long presence in the Christian philosophy, some Christians were not very fond of the idea of natural theology. Especially, Reformed or Calvinist theologians had some arguments against it.

19th-century Reformed Dutch theologian Herman Bavinck, suggested that a Christian doesn't need any argument to believe in God; he should *start* from belief in God rather than from the premises of some argument whose conclusion is that God exists. He points out that belief in God is similar to the belief in the existence of the self and of the external world. In none of these cases, we have a proof or arguments to believe in them. We just believe in them. Bavinck suggests that belief in God is a properly basic belief.

John Calvin, on the other hand, argues that the God has implanted in us all an innate tendency, or nisus, or disposition to believe in him. According to him, our disposition to believe is partly suppressed by the existence of the sin in the world. Calvin claims that who believes in God, solely due to this disposition, is entirely within is epistemic rights in so doing. 

> There is within the human mind, and indeed by natural instinct, an awareness of divinity. This we take to be beyond controversy.

The 20th-century theologian Karl Barth also opposed natural theology. According to Barth, engaging in natural theology and attempting to prove the existence of God from a "natural" perspective implies adopting an unbeliever's standpoint, thus abandoning one's Christian beliefs. Plantinga, on the other hand, counters this objection with the following argument: A natural theologian doesn't necessarily have to believe in God solely based on the arguments he presents. Instead, he can consider his belief in God as properly basic and then use arguments for the existence of God to demonstrate to the unbeliever that belief in God follows logically from other things he already believes. This way, natural theologian aims to show that the unbeliever can only continue in unbelief at the cost of inconsistency in his beliefs. Therefore, even though Barth urges us to avoid the standpoint of unbelief, we can still employ natural theology without fully embracing it.

Plantinga argues that what is most interesting about Barth's claim - along with the claims made by Calvin, Kuper and Bavinck - is that he holds that belief in God is **properly basic** - that is, such that it is rational to accept it without accepting it on the basis of any other propositions or beliefs at all. Reformed theologians, in general, hold that a believer is entirely rational in starting with belief in God and using it as premise for other arguments. According to Plantinga, reformed theologians should be understood as rejecting classical foundationalism, as they don't necessitate that basic beliefs must be self-evident or incorigible or evident to the senses. 

### Is Belief in God Properly Basic?

As one of the most outspoken proponents of reformed epistemology, Plantinga attempts to show that belief in God can be considered as properly basic. Reformed epistemologists reject the classical foundationalism based on the reasons we discussed above. Plantinga argues that even if one doesn't know of a satisfactory substitute for the criteria proposed by classical foundationalism, he is nevertheless entirely within his epistemic rights in holding that certain propositions in certain conditions are not properly basic. Therefore taking the belief in God as properly basic doesn't suggest that he is committed to supposing just anything is properly basic. But, if one has no such criterion for proper basicality, how can he fairly reject belief in the Great Pumpkin as properly basic?

Denying classical foundationalism doesn't mean denying all forms of foundationalism. Plantinga suggests that we can still accept a form of foundationalism with different criteria for proper basicality. Rejecting the former criterion doesn't mean "anything goes" such as God or Great Pumpkin. According to [Kelly James Clark](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kelly_James_Clark), the epistemologist ought to assemble beliefs he considers properly basic and proceed to frame a principle of rationality on the basis of this set of beliefs. He goes on to say:

> The theist may take belief in God as one of the set of paradigm basic beliefs and frame his principles of rationality according to that set of beliefs. On this theory a great many beliefs will be excluded. Thus, this method will refute the charge that the rejection of classical foundationalism entails that “anything goes.”

Plantinga believes that it is not likely to find a necessary and sufficient condition for proper basicality following the clearly self-evident premises. He argues that the correct criteria for proper basicality must be reached by a relevant set of examples *inductively*. For the difference between great pumpking and the idea of God, Plantinga provides the following argument:

> The Reformed epistemologist can properly hold that belief in the Great Pumpkin is not properly basic, even though he holds that belief in God is properly basic and even if he has no full fledged criterion of proper basicality. Of course he is committed to supposing that there is a relevant *difference* between belief in God and belief in the Great Pumpkin, if he holds that the former but not the latter is properly basic. But this should be no great embarrassment; there are plenty of candidates. Thus the Reformed epistemologist may concur with Calvin in holding that God has implanted in us a natural tendency to see his hand in the world around us; the same cannot be said for the Great Pumpkin, there being no Great Pumpkin and no natural tendency to accept beliefs about the Great Pumpkin.

According to Plantinga, "belief in God, like other properly basic beliefs, is not groundless or arbitrary; it is grounded in justification-conferring conditions". Beliefs one might have, such as the feeling of God's speaking to him, disapproving of what he has done recently, forgiving him and the feeling that God is to be thanked and praised are properly basic propositions in the right circumstances.


### Is Reformed Epistemology a form of Fideism?

In the last section of his essay, Plantinga emphasizes the distinction between reformed epistemology and [fideism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fideism). He argues that there are two kinds of fideism in hand: moderate fideism and extreme fideism. **Extreme fideism** suggests that there is an inevitable conflict between faith and reason - and faith is to be preferred in such circumstances. One could argue that [Kierkegaard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%B8ren_Kierkegaard), whose work "Fear and Trembling" I briefly discussed in my [earlier post](./20230531), is one of the proponents of extreme fideism. Obviously, reformed epistemologist doesn't have to be an extreme fideist as the views on proper basicality of the belief in God doesn't lead one to the conclusion that faith and reason conflict with each other. **Moderate fideism**, on the other hand, suggests that one has to rely on faith rather than reason when it comes to religious matters. What kind of beliefs we have are based on faith, that is a question not easy to answer. One attempt was made by [Abraham Kuyper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abraham_Kuyper):

> There is thus no objection to the use of the term 'faith' for that function of the soul by which it attains certainty immediately or directly, without the aid of discursive demonstration. This places faith over against demonstration, but not over against knowing.

According to this definition, basic beliefs are accepted through faith, while those arrived at through inference are not. However, Plantinga finds this interpretation lacking in capturing the true essence of fideism. Shestov, an extreme fideist, goes so far as to suggest that one should believe 2 + 2 = 5 if God says so. But under this definition of fideism, Shestov wouldn't be considered a fideist since he supports this proposition based on reason, as it is proposed by God. On the other hand, if he were to support that 2 + 2 = 4, then it would be an act of faith, as this proposition is self-evident. Consequently, in this case, Shestov would be seen as a rationalist rather than a fideist, believing that 2 + 2 = 5, as described by Kuyper. Plantinga argues that we should keep in mind that there can be basic propositions accepted by *reason* and propositions based on premises accepted by *faith*. Then the question is: Is the reformed epistemologist a fideist in this sense? Is the belief in God among the deliverances of reason or an item of faith? Plantinga answers this question as follows: 

> According to Calvin everyone, whether
in the faith or not, has a tendency or nisus, in certain situations, to apprehend God's existence and to grasp something of his nature and actions. This natural knowledge can be and is suppressed by sin, but the fact remains that a capacity to apprehend God's existence is as much part of our natural noetic equipment as is the capacity to apprehend perceptual
truths, truths about the past, and truths about other minds. Belief in the
existence of God is in the same boat as belief in other minds, the past,
and perceptual objects; in each case God has so constructed us that in
the right circumstances we form the belief in question. But then the belief
that there is such a person as God is as much among the deliverances
of reason as those other beliefs.

To conclude, reformed epistemologist is not a fideist at all *with respect* to belief in God. He does not hold that there is any conflict between faith and reason here, and he does not even hold that we cannot attain this fundamental truth by reason; he holds, instead, that it is among the deliverances of reason. 

---

**To summarize**, Plantinga takes a serious step to show that it is **impossible to effectively argue that religious belief is epistemically flawed solely due to its lack of evidence or logical reasoning**. Indeed, classical foundationalism is self-referentially incoherent and it requires us to provide proper basicality conditions. Plantinga believes that it's not likely that we'll find those conditions directly - rather we should gather instances of beliefs that we consider to be properly basic and explore the situations in which they are deemed as such. Similar to what he supported in his book [God and Other Minds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/God_and_Other_Minds), he urges that, the deliverances of reason include "the existence of God just as
much as perceptual truths, self-evident truths, memory truths, other minds and the like" within the Reformed view.