---
layout: page
permalink: /blog/20230532
title: Reason and Belief in God - Part I
date: 2023-07-09 11:12:00-0400           # NAME OF THE FILE MUST BE IN THIS FORMAT: date-xxx.md
tags: philosophy-of-religion analytic-philosophy
categories: philosophy
nav: true
---

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/Lóndrangar.jpg"  class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true width=600 %}
    </div>
</div>

In this post, I'd like to summarize the key points highlighted in the well-known essay "Reason and Belief in God" by [Alvin Plantinga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alvin_Plantinga). I will also provide some of my own thoughts on the matter. This essay can be found in the book *Faith and Rationality: Reason and Belief in God* (1983) edited by Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff. You can find the outline of this post including chapters and sections below.

- Part I: The Evidentialist Objection to Belief In God
    - [The Presumption of Atheism by Flew](#the-presumption-of-atheism-by-flew)
    - [Obligatory Nature of Atheism by Scriven](#obligatory-nature-of-atheism-by-scriven)

### The Presumption of Atheism by Flew


Let's start our discussion with the following question: *What is atheism?* If you have been in the discourse lately, it's not uncommon to encounter situations where one claims to be an atheist and then someone else asks them to prove that God doesn't exist. Firstly, is it possible to prove that something doesn't exist - or maybe the real question is: is it necessary to prove that it doesn't exist? For example, it is theoretically possible to prove that there doesn't exist any polar bear within the boundaries of Andrews Forest in South Africa. You can either argue that it's impossible for a polar bear to survive in the climatic conditions of that region - or you can head out there and see for yourself (although it may not be practical, it offers a higher level of certainty). So, if there is an "abearist" - someone who doesn't believe that a polar bear exists in Andrew Forest - we can expect him to justify his belief easily. However, when discussing metaphysics, it becomes more challenging to definitively prove the existence or non-existence of something. This is because we no longer have the option to rely on firsthand experience or (repeatable) observation. In such circumstances, philosophers tend to prove the existence of a being by showing that it is *logically necessary* for such a being to exist. Sometimes philosophers tend to propose arguments that show that the existence of a being is *probable* or *likely* - and vice versa. 

There have been various different definitions for the word "atheism" so far. One of them was given by [Antony Flew](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antony_Flew) in his essay "The Presumption of Atheism" (1972):

> The word 'atheism,' however, has in this contention to be construed unusually. Whereas nowadays the usual meaning of 'atheist' in English is 'someone who asserts there is no such being as God,'
I want the word to be understood not positively but negatively. I want the original Greek preface 'a' to be read in the same way in 'atheist' as it is customarily read in such other Greco-English words as 'amoral,' 'atypical,' and 'asymmetrical.' In this interpretation an atheist becomes: not someone who positively asserts the non-existence of God; but someone who is simply not a theist.

In other words, Flew is saying that the burden of proof is on the theist, not the atheist. The atheist is not making any positive claims, but rather, they are simply rejecting the claims made by the theist. This is similar to the situation in a court case where the defendant is presumed innocent until proven guilty. In this case, the theist is the defendant and the atheist is the jury. The theist is making a positive claim that God exists, and the atheist is rejecting that claim. The atheist is not making any positive claims, and therefore, they are not required to provide any evidence. 

Definition of "atheism" may vary from one atheist philosopher to another. 
Antony Flew, primarily aligned with explicit and weak atheism. This perspective entails not believing in the necessary existence of God while refraining from asserting reasons for His nonexistence. Flew's position was rooted in skepticism and lacked a positive affirmation of God's absence.



* Implicit atheism (Weak): Lack of belief in God, not because you have thought about it and concluded that God does not exist, but because you have never thought about it (for very young children or those who are really not familiar with the whole idea).
* Explicit atheism
    * Explicit weak atheism: Lack of belief in God, because of lack of evidence for its existence.
    * Explicit strong atheism: Belief that God does not exist, because of evidence for its non-existence.

### Obligatory Nature of Atheism by Scriven

Another argument, coming from Michael Scriven, is that atheism is obligatory in the absence of evidence for the existence of God. In other words, if there is no evidence for the existence of God, then you are obligated to be an atheist. He argues:

> We need not have a proof that God does not exist in order to justify atheism. Atheism is obligatory in the absence of any evidence for God's existence. The proper alternative, where there is no evidence, is not mere suspension of belief, e.g., about Santa Claus; it is disbelief". 

Here, Plantinga argues that Michael Scriven treats the positive and negative arguments arbitrarily without any justification. Say, there are two propositions: (1) God exists and (2) God does not exist. According to Scriven, if we have not enough evidence for (1), then we are obliged to believe its denial (2). But, if we treat (2) like (1), then we would supoose that if we had no evidence for (2), then we would be obliged to believe its denial (1) - and both sides lack the evidence, it leads to a contradiction. But apparently, Scriven wouldn't agree with this conclusion. Then, how can we justify to treat these propositions so differently? Plantinga says that the way Scriven treats these arguments differently looks like "a piece of merely arbitrary intellectual imperialism". Plantinga argues:

> Scriven speaks of obligations, duties, with respect to belief: in the absence
of evidence, he says, atheism is obligatory. What sorts of principles of epistemic
obligation underlie this claim? Obviously we cannot sensibly hold that for any
proposition A, if S has no evidence for A, then S is rationally obliged to believe
~A; for then if S has no evidence for A and also none for ~ A, S will be obliged
to believe both A and —A. Some of what Scriven says suggests that it is just
*existential propositions* with respect to which S is obliged to toe.

Scriven believes that positive existential hypotheses have a very different standing from negative existential hypotheses with respect to the obligation to believe. In short, we are oblibed to believe that a positive existential hypothesis is not true if we have no evidence for it. But, we are not obliged to believe that a negative existential hypothesis is true if we have no evidence for it.

To invalidate this suggestion of Scriven, Plantinga provides the following arguments:

- (3) [Definition] X is idential with God and he has created all the human beings there are.
- (4) There is at least one human being that was not created by X.
- (5) If X exists, then X has created all the human beings there are.

(3) is just a formality to prevent possible objections to (5) (if one posits that existence of God doesn't *necessitates* that the all human beings are created by him) (4) is a positive existential proposition, therefore if there is not enough evidence for it, then we are obliged to believe its denial (according to Scriven):

- (6) Every human being has been created by X. 

Any argument for (4), with the help of (5), can be transformed into an argument for the non-existence of X. 

- (7) Proposition (4) is true if and only if X does not exist.

If we have no evidence for (4), then we are obliged to believe its denial (6). But, if we have no evidence for the existence of X, then we are obliged to believe its denial. In conclusion, we are obliged to believe X doesn't exist and all human beings are created by X at the same time. Apparently, this is a contradiction. Therefore, Scriven's suggestion doesn't seem to be valid.

In concluding this section, allow me to provide an additional illustration from a computer science standpoint, aiming to further elaborate on the notion put forth by Plantinga. [P versus NP problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P_versus_NP_problem) is an infamous problem in the world of computer science. It is one of the seven [Millennium Prize Problems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennium_Prize_Problems) that were stated by the Clay Mathematics Institute in 2000. To put simply, *P* is the set of problems that can be solved in polynomial time by a deterministic Turing machine (fancy way of saying "a computer"). *NP* is the set of problems that can be solved in nondeterministic polynomial time. Nondeterminism is another fancy concept, where we are allowed to make guesses and split into different universes to solve a problem in polynomial time. You can ask, why do we emphasize the "polynomial time" a lot? Well, basically because if a problem can be solved in polynomial time, then it is considered to be "efficiently solvable". If not, then we tend to say we can't really solve that problem in a "reasonable" amount of time. 

Now, **P versus NP** problem asks the question: Is P equals NP? Apparently, any problem in P is also in NP (because we can solve it in polynomial time and you can convert any deterministic machine to nondeterministic one - just split into different branches in each step for fun). However, we do not know if every problem in NP is also in P, that is, any problem that can be solved in nondeterministic polynomial time can also be solved in deterministic polynomial time. If this is the case, then we can say that P equals NP. This is a very hard problem to solve, because it is *almost* impossible to prove that a question (which has a solution in NP) cannot be solved in P (we can't find any clever algorithm to solve it in deterministic polynomial time). Computer scientists care *a lot* about this question, and it is regarded as an unsolved problem. 

Let's "solve" this problem with Scriven's magical approach:

- (8) $$P \subseteq NP$$
- (9) There exists a problem that can be solved in nondeterministic polynomial time (NP) but cannot be solved in deterministic polynomial time (P).

Apparently, there is not enough evidence for the positive existential proposition (9) - otherwise this problem wouldn't be an open question. Therefore, we are obliged to believe its denial:

- (10) Every problem that can be solved in nondeterministic polynomial time (NP) can also be solved in deterministic polynomial time (P).

By (8) and (10), P = NP. Interestingly, it is *rational* to believe that P = NP - according to the argument "Obligatory Nature of P = NP In the Absence of Evidence by Scriven". Of course, such conclusion doesn't make sense (it would trully change the way we perceive the world - and the current [cryptographic systems](https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/8891/p-np-and-current-cryptographic-systems)). I find it highly unlikely that any reputable scientist would endorse the veracity of proposition (10) solely due to the absence of evidence refuting it. What really surprises me is how some scientists actually acknowledge that accepting proposition (2) can be seen as rational, **only** because they assume there isn't enough evidence to support proposition (1). 

In the conclusion, Plantinga formulates the evidentialist position against theism in a different manner:
- (11) It is irrational or unreasonable to accept theistic belief in the
absence of sufficient evidence or reasons.
- (12) There is no evidence or at any rate not sufficient evidence for the proposition that God exists.

